Web Development with Clojure ：Build Bulletproof Web Apps with Less Code

http://pragprog.com/book/dswdcloj/web-development-with-clojure

About this Book
250 pages (est)
Published: 2014-01-15
Release: B6.0 (2013-12-16)
ISBN: 978-1-93778-564-2

Modern web development needs modern tools. Web Development With Clojure shows you how to apply Clojure programming fundamentals to build real-world solutions. You’ll develop all the pieces of a full web application in this powerful language. If you already have some familiarity with Clojure, you’ll learn how to put it to serious practical use. If you’re new to the language, the book provides just enough Clojure to get down to business.

You’ll learn the full process of web development using Clojure while getting hands-on experience with current tools, libraries, and best practices in the language. You’ll develop Clojure apps with both the Light Table and Eclipse development environments. Rather than frameworks, Clojure development builds on rich libraries. You’ll acquire expertise in the popular Ring/Compojure stack, and you’ll learn to use the Liberator library to quickly develop RESTful services. Plus, you’ll find out how to use ClojureScript to work in one language on the client and server sides.

Throughout the book, you’ll develop key components of web applications, including multiple approaches to database access. You’ll create a simple guestbook app and an app to serve resources to users. By the end, you will have developed a rich Picture Gallery web application from conception to packaging and deployment.

This book is for anyone interested in taking the next step in web development.

What You Need

The latest JVM, Clojure 1.4+, and the Leiningen build tool, as well as an editor such as Emacs, Eclipse, or Light Table.

====
About the Author
Dmitri Sotnikov has been developing Web applications professionally for close to a decade. He has developed and continues to maintain several Clojure libraries as well as the Luminus framework. He has worked in both startup and enterprise environments.

====
Contents and Extracts
This book is currently in beta, so the contents and extracts will change as the book is developed.

Preface
Required Background
Why Functional?
Why Clojure?
Getting Your Feet Wet
Setting Up Your Environment
Your First Project
Clojure Web Stack
Routing Requests With Ring
Defining the Routes With Compojure
Application Architecture
Beyond Compojure and Ring
What We Just Learned
Liberator Services
Creating The Project
Defining Resources
Putting It All Together
Database Access
Working With Relational Databases
Report Generation
Summary
Picture Gallery
The Development Process
What’s In a Gallery
Creating The Application
Application Data Model
Task A: Account Registration
Task B: Login and Logout
Task C: Uploading Pictures
Task D: Displaying Pictures
Task E: Deleting Pictures
Task F: Account Deletion
Finishing Touches
Adding Some Style
Unit Tests
Logging
Applications Profiles
Packaging Applications
Wrapping up
Mixing It Up
Using Selmer
Upgrading To ClojureScript
SQL Korma
Creating Application Templates
Wrapping Up
Appendix A: Alternative IDE Options
Installing Eclipse
Installing Emacs
Further Alternatives
Appendix B: Syntax
Data Types
Using Functions
Anonymous Functions
Named Functions
Higher-Order Functions
Closures
Threading Expressions
Being Lazy
Structuring the Code
Destructuring Data
Namespaces
Dynamic variables
Calling out to Java
Calling methods
What About Global State?
Writing Code That Writes Code For You
The Read Evaluate Print Loop
Summary
Appendix C: Document-Oriented Database Access
Picking the Right Database
Using CouchDB
Using MongoDB